That hymn has one of my favorite lines and all of Christian hymnity.
Does this my father's world, though?
Let me never forget that.
Oh, the wrong seems also strong.
God is the ruler yet.
What a great line that.
Oh, the wrong seems also strong.
He is the ruler yet.
We among all people should be the most hopeful.
Cynicism, negativity are not fruits of the spirit.
That's coming from somebody who is cynical and negative.
optimism and joy.
That's who we are as Christians.
So I invite you now to stand for our gospel lesson, which will come from Matthew's gospel.
We're going to be here for a minute.
The next few months, Luke reading about the Lord's prayer found in Matthew chapter six, we're reading verses nine through 13 of Matthew chapter six.
Pray then in this way, our Father in heaven, how would be your name?
Your kingdom come.
Your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
Forgive us our debts as we also have forgiven our debtors, and do not bring us into the time of trial, but rescue us from the evil one.
This is the word of God for the people of God.
Thanks be to God.
You may be seated.
There are certain parts of worship
that I think there's something beautiful about the rhythm of worship.
I think there's something beautiful, particularly in a traditional service.
As a pastor, I have served and preached in services that are traditional as well as services that are contemporary.
I don't think Christian worship can be summed up in one style of worship because this traditional service seems pretty traditional.
till you go to a Catholic church.
And then you realize, oh, it's not that traditional.
It's all the rhythms and the traditions that we're comfortable with.
So there is no, I don't think there's a better than or worse than a right or wrong, but every style of worship has its rhythms.
And I am most comfortable in the rhythm of the traditional service that we have here at St. Matthew's.
It's very much like the service I grew up with.
It just feels like church to me.
But that said, as a pastor, sometimes honesty
Sometimes when you're in worship, you can almost kind of go on cruise control, because, you know, you've done so many times and you may be thinking about, oh no, oh no, the live stream is not working.
Let me step out the back and go figure out what's going on in the live stream.
If you ever see me slip out during worship, you can assume something's on the live stream that I've got to go fix.
Like, oh no, I've got to make sure my Bible's marked for the reading of scripture.
So it's easy sometimes for the little things that you're doing when you're leading worship to kind of take over your brain.
And for the parts of worship that are kind of rhythmic and regular, to not really be thinking.
So when I was in Ripley as a younger pastor back when I had the black hair, the prayer that I prayed, the morning prayer is very similar.
I've used the same pattern for years, the line we pray for those for whom no one else prays, I always pray that because I stole that from a professor of mine in seminary and I just made it my own.
But you know, I've always said,
We asked this prayer not in our name, but we asked in the name of the one who taught us to pray as we say.
You know, all of those preachers had little segues that we use.
I'm sure, I'm sure Mitchell, you had one like we all got something that we'd always say that our wives are tired of hearing us say, cause y'all have had to hear it for 40, 50 years.
So, but you know, you always say it.
And so, but it kind of comes with rhythmic.
So one Sunday, I was in Ripley and I was getting ready to do it.
And I said, we asked this not in our name.
We asked in the name of the one who taught us to pray as we say, I believe in God the Father Almighty, make our heaven and heaven.
I slipped into the apostle's creed because my brain wasn't really focused on what I was doing.
I had done it so many times that I just kind of glitched, if you will, it went right to the apostle's creed.
So the things that are regular can become forgotten.
I think there's something beautiful about the rhythm of worship.
I think there's something soothing.
about the regular rhythm of worship.
I think there's something powerful there.
But I think it's also incredibly important that we, from time to time, stop and really think about what it is that we're doing.
Why do we do it that way?
Why are we wearing purple today for the next few weeks?
Why do we say the apostle's creed?
Why during Lent do we take off the creed and add in a confession of sin?
You know, why?
Why?
Why does this prayer
that we pray every Sunday means so much to us.
And while frankly, if there's any things I want our children to have deeply imprinted upon their soul by the time they graduate from this church, I'd like for it to be the Lord's Prayer and the Apostles' Creed.
Good friends, if you got the Lord's Prayer and the Apostles' Creed deep down in here, you're gonna be okay.
You got something to turn back to.
no matter where you find yourself.
So we're gonna look a little deeper the next few weeks at the Lord's Prayer, something we pray every week, something most of us can probably pray in our sleep, something we're used to praying, something that's part of what we do and what we know.
So we're gonna take some time and go a little deeper this morning in the next few weeks with the Lord's Prayer.
I remember hearing this once and it stuck with me throughout the years.
The Lord's Prayer is so simple
that a child can memorize it, but so complicated that the greatest theologian cannot understand it.
And that's the Lord's Prayer.
That's exactly right.
So we're not going to get all the meat off this bone today, nor will it be throughout the rest of the six weeks we're in Lent.
But each week I want to take a part of the prayer and look a little deeper at it and see and understand what it is exactly that we're praying and what it is exactly that we're
talking to God about.
So today, we're gonna look more in depth at the first section.
Our Father in Heaven, hallowed be your name.
So let's talk about that.
First off, in Matthew's Gospel, we see the Lord's Prayer as part of the greater Sermon on the Mount narrative.
We see Jesus.
This is part of his core teaching.
In fact, some scholars will tell you that the Lord's Prayer was the center of all of the Sermon on the Mount.
In Luke's Gospel, we see it in a little bit different context.
But Matthew is framing this within the Sermon amount for us as Christians is our Christian ethic.
And so what I mean by that is this.
I love Matthew is my, Matthew is my favorite gospel.
And here's why.
Matthew is the most Jewish of all the gospels.
Matthew is a Jewish tax collector.
So for Matthew, the Old Testament is a big deal.
To understand Matthew, you've got to understand the Old Testament.
So the Sermon on the Mount for Matthew is our Christian ethic.
It's how we Christians are called to live.
And that's hard, y'all, because it's got some stuff in there.
I don't like forgiving your enemies.
I don't want to do that.
I don't like them.
They're my enemies for a reason.
If they weren't my enemies, they'd be my friends.
So forgiving them's hard, but yeah, Jesus doesn't give us an out.
He says you have to, but in the midst of this, he gives us this method of prayer.
Matthew, so it's very Jewish.
So think about this for the original audience.
So in Matthew's gospel, Jesus goes up on a mountain and gives the people a way of living or to put another way gives the people a law.
Is there anyone else in the Bible that goes up on a mountain and gives the people a law?
Moses, yes, exactly.
So Matthew is showing Jesus in the light of Moses that in the same way, the law should matter to the Jewish people so much for us, for the Christian perspective, and this is our law.
So when you see that, you're gonna see how much, so much of this is steeped in Jesus understanding who God is also from a Jewish understanding.
So our father, that's a very interesting phrase, two things that are interesting about our father first,
What's the first word of the Lord prayer?
Our, our, not my father.
This is a plural pronoun.
The Lord's prayer is a prayer that is meant to be prayed together.
We can have as Christians and we should have as Christians our own individual time of prayer.
Jesus, the scripture tells us quite often rose up early and went off to a deserted place to pray.
So this is not saying that we should not have individual times of prayer in scripture, but this is telling us, this is our father, our, this body matters.
You know, our shared life together matters.
This community, by the way, this community that is bigger than just
Saint Matthews, this community that is bigger than just the United Methodist Church, this community that's bigger than just Wesleyan churches, that's bigger than just American churches, but that makes up all of the body of Christ.
No matter what church they worship in, whether it be here in Zimbabwe, in Manila, in the Ukraine, wherever, that we are praying together as his body.
The very first word Jesus gives us in the prayer is our.
He's telling us from the beginning, we need each other.
We need each other.
The great English poet John Dunne said, no man is an island.
Our father.
It's interesting the word in Greek that Jesus uses here.
Usually Jesus uses when he's praying to God, he uses the word abba.
Paul used that word a lot to Abba.
Abba is personal.
Abba is daddy.
Abba, in fact, if you were ever able to go to the Middle East, you would, Holly and I, our first trip to Israel, we were, it was like towards the end of the trip.
We were tired, we were grumpy, we were ready to get home.
You know, and our babies were little.
Those little college kids were like, here, the long food went away from them.
So we were walking in one of the little alleys there in Jerusalem, and we saw this shopkeeper.
sweeping his job.
His little son was outside.
He was holding his arms going, Abba, Abba, Abba, Abba.
In the same way an American child would go, daddy, daddy, daddy, daddy.
That was the language he was using for his father.
It was Abba.
That is the normal term Jesus uses for God when he prays.
But that's not the term he uses here.
This is not, this is not Abba.
This is father.
This is
King, this is Lord.
So from the very beginning of the Lord's prayer, as Courtney told our children this morning, this is establishing God as something different than us, something bigger than us, something smarter and stronger and wiser than us.
This is not, there are many times in scripture that we see God as the daddy who's
laugh we climb up into?
That's not this.
This is the king.
But this is also in this word here.
It's also the king who knows how to give good gifts.
It's not the evil king, but it's the benevolent king, the king who loves
his subjects, who loves his children.
As Jesus tells us later in the summer on the Mount, if you who are evil know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more does your perfect heavenly father know how to give you good gifts?
In other words, this is a God bigger than us, a God smarter than us, a God that is other than us, that is not human, but yet this God who is other than us loves
us deeply.
I think that's a beautiful encapsulation right there.
Just an our Father.
That's a beautiful encapsulation of Genesis 1 and Genesis 2.
I love Genesis 1 and Genesis 2 because Genesis 1 and 2 gives us, you may not know this, we have two creation accounts in Genesis.
We have two creation accounts.
Because in Genesis 1 we see a God who speaks and
life erupts.
He speaks and light comes and things happen.
He speaks life into existence.
He speaks creation into existence.
We see a God that is omnipotent and powerful and strong and wise and other.
Genesis one, Genesis two, we see God make Adam from the dust of the earth and breathe into him the breath of life.
And then we see God make Adam and he goes,
Bless his heart.
He's gonna be lonely.
Let me make him a helper.
And out of love for Adam, he makes Eve.
So in Genesis one, we see a God that is huge and big and large.
And we see in Genesis two, we see a God that is intimate and personal.
Which is it?
Yes.
Yes, it's both.
It's both.
And our Father, we see a God that is so, we're talking in Sunday school this morning about Psalm 8.
And how ultimately we only know of God, we only know of God what God has revealed about Himself to us.
We only know of God what God has revealed to us through Scripture and through Jesus.
That's why y'all know I love Colossians 1, 15.
Jesus Christ is the visible image of the invisible God.
So what we know of the Father, we must see through the lenses of the sun.
But there's more of God than I don't know.
Paul says in 1 Corinthians 13, we see as to a mirror dimly, soon we will see face to face.
One day we will fully know even as we have been fully known.
So there's parts of God that we're not going to understand to glory.
We're just not.
And that may sound scary, but to me that's also comforting because that means there's a really big God who's on our side.
And he's just not a distant God, but he is our father.
He loves us.
who art in heaven.
Heaven is significant just because the one that like the word father, it just shows the otherness of God.
God's big.
The heaven just basically doesn't mean God to bear them on the clouds.
I asked Thomas if he's seeing God up there yet and he hasn't responded.
God's not up there.
God is not.
God is a bod.
He's different than us.
He's just
other than us.
The Lord's prayer is telling us that God is bigger than us.
So in heaven implies the fact that he's just bigger than us.
Our father who art in heaven.
Here's the big part.
Hollywood be that name.
Holy.
We're going to talk in a couple of weeks when we get to trespasses about the translation of the Lord's prayer.
And I got a joke about that when we get there.
But Hollywood.
Hollywood means holy.
Holy be your name.
Okay, name, let's talk about name, let's talk about holy.
Names in the Bible are interesting.
Say, I remember when we were having our kids, we spent a lot of time thinking about the names.
You know, what do we want to name our kids?
You want to use family names, you know, there are name books you can use, there's all kind of stuff.
I had one goal for my kids names, well, I had two goals.
Goal one was whatever we named them, we were calling them because
When you're named Andrew and they call you Andy, I've got 1400 legal names, y'all.
I don't know what I've signed as what in my life.
So for my children, what I wanted was whatever we called them, whatever we named them, we were calling them.
That was one.
Second thing, I wanted to get my name, they didn't get them beat up on the playground.
That was the other thing.
I wanted a beat up list name.
Those are my two goals.
In the Bible, your name wasn't that.
Your name was synonymous with who you were.
It was who you were.
So think about scripture.
How many times does God change someone's name?
Think about it.
Abram becomes Abraham.
Sarah becomes Sarah.
Saul becomes Paul.
Simon becomes Peter.
All over scripture, God is changing people's names.
In Revelation, it says, we will be given a new name in heaven.
So in the Bible, your name isn't just what they called you, but your name was who you were.
In the book, Hosea, whenever he names his children, things like God has left the land desolate, like God called and wrote God has left the land desolate.
Are you here?
Like that's a mouthful.
But when he was named that, he was trying to say who God was.
in Scripture, your name was who you were.
So to speak about God's name being holy, as much as according to the great job of saying that, yes, God's name should be honored, but God is not that God, not that the word God is holy, which it is, but that God is holy.
God.
And then that leaves to hold another question.
What does it mean to be holy?
When I read the Bible, I interpret holiness being different, being different.
So when you read the Levitical codes,
I don't think God has, we have to grow their crops a certain way or wear certain fabrics.
And I don't think God's really that worried about how the crops are planted, but I do think this is what God's trying to get at with those rules.
The reason why the Israelites were called to plant their crops this way is because, well, their neighbors planted their crops this way.
You know, the reason why they had to wear certain fabric here is because their neighbors had to wear fabric here.
It wasn't so much about the actual thing they were doing.
It's that they were called to be different from their neighbors.
They were called to be set apart.
They were called to be holy.
That's what holiness is.
Holiness at its core is to be set apart.
It's to be different.
It's not to be like everyone else.
So as Christians that are praying to a God that is holy, our call in life is to be
Holy.
So often Leviticus, it says, be holy as I am holy.
And first Peter, we're called to be holy.
We're called as Christians.
And that, by the way, is the, this concept of holiness is the foundation of what is the Methodist movement.
John Wesley's, one of John Wesley's grand contributions to Christianity was the emphasis upon holiness first people.
And that sounds scary, but let's be very clear.
I'm not talking about morality.
What we have done is we have mistaken morality for holiness.
Morality is this.
I'm a good person.
And how do I know I'm a good person?
Well, I'm a good person because I believe this specific doctrine or because I have this specific lifestyle or I vote this specific way.
I'm a good person because of these things here and you're a bad person.
Because you do not share my theology.
Are you do not share my politics?
Are you are different than me?
Morality makes me good and them bad.
And ooh, that's fun.
Cause if I'm good, then I'm justified in whatever I do.
And if they're bad,
It doesn't really matter what I do because I'm still better than them.
You know?
You usually folk a lot more far about the preacher preaching on somebody else's sins than on their sins.
Morality is, I'm good.
And they're bad.
Holiness is not the preacher, not the deacon, but it's me, O Lord, standing in the need of prayer.
Not my mom and not my father, but it's me, O Lord, standing in need of prayer.
Holiness understands that all of us, all of us, all of us need Jesus.
All of us need Jesus.
Morality is, I'm good and they're bad.
And you know why morality is frustrating?
There's a great line by C.S.
Lewis.
No man knows how very evil he is till he has tried very hard to be good.
If we're gonna live lives based on morality, we're gonna always be fallen.
And that's why I think people leave the church because we think it's about morality.
We think it's about being a good person.
It's not about that because if we try so hard to be good, we're gonna fail.
And then when we fail, we feel like bad Christians.
So if I ask you this morning, what do I need to do?
You're gonna probably say, well, I need to give more or serve more or do more.
I need to be doing more.
I know I'm looking for fire committee members here this morning.
I do not want you to give more.
I want you to love Jesus.
Okay.
I do not want you to serve more.
I want you to love Jesus.
I do not want you to come to church more.
I want you to love Jesus because I believe that if we love Jesus, the rest falls into place.
You can do all the right stuff and not love Jesus and have missed the whole
point, because I have to believe that if I love Jesus, that I'm going to want to give all that I have to him.
Yes, my finances, but also my life.
And I have to believe that if I love Jesus, that he is not going to let me hate my neighbor.
regardless of what my neighbor does, he's not going to let me out of it because his very Lord's prayer is tied into loving our neighbors.
And if I have to believe if I love Jesus, there's something even that's going to want to be with his people.
It's not about morality or being a good person.
It's about holiness that is found only in Jesus.
And it's about being different, being different.
And for instance, if we love Jesus with all that we are, then He's going to make us different.
He's going to make us different.
Like I tell folks, if I tell people when you tell your neighbors, you know I'm a Christian?
And they go, really?
It's not a good sign.
Not a good sign.
Vernon Manning in his great book, The Rag of a Fungospel.
If you've not read it, add that to your reading list.
The ragamuffin gospel brought Brennan Manning.
He said, Christianity is one beggar showing another beggar where to find a piece of bread.
That's holiness.
Not perfection.
In fact, Wesley never talked a perfect action in his works.
He talked about perfect love.
And so there's any area in my life that I'm going to strive for perfection in through God's grace.
May I love perfectly.
May I love my neighbor perfectly and may I love my God perfectly.
And friends, if we're doing that, we will be holy.
Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.
the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.
Let us pray.